# 02. Length Units

---

<details>
    <summary>🎬 Video: Length Units</summary><div class='video-container'>
        <iframe src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/CbbuGyNUrEk?rel=0" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen rel='0'></iframe></div>
</details>

---


# Absolute Units

We’ve had our absolute units since CSS began, and they are most useful to us when the *output format is known*. If you create a [print stylesheet for a website](https://www.smashingmagazine.com/2011/11/how-to-set-up-a-print-style-sheet/) and especially if you work with the CSS specifications for creating printed books, you’ll become familiar with working with real-world units such as `in` for inches.

The units `mm` (millimeter), `cm` (centimeter), `in` (inch), `pt` (point) and `pc` (pica or 12 points) are not units you would be recommended to use for CSS layouts for screen use. So we’ll concentrate on the `px` pixel unit here.

## What is a pixel?

**Hardware pixels**
A hardware pixel is a physical point on the screen, the smallest point that could be displayed. It can’t change size or be zoomed. Working with a non “retina” screen the reference pixel and the hardware pixel appear the same. If we use CSS to draw a box on the screen that is 200 pixels wide and 200 pixels in height, that would directly map to our hardware pixels.

If a “retina” or high resolution display was to draw the box using the same hardware pixels then it would appear to be half the size we expected. On a high resolution display the hardware pixels are smaller, and the number used doubled. There are more “pixels per inch”, and so what happens is the actual reference pixel that is used to draw the box is now two hardware pixels. This achieves a box of the size we were expecting but also means that the display looks smoother and crisper, you can’t see the individual pixels.

[**The reference pixel**](http://alistapart.com/article/a-pixel-identity-crisis/)
The reference pixel is the visual angle of one pixel on a device with a pixel density of 96dpi and a distance from the reader of an arm's length. For a nominal arm's length of 28 inches, the visual angle is therefore about 0.0213 degrees. For reading at arm's length, 1px thus corresponds to about 0.26 mm (1/96 inch).

So the reference pixel is a pixel that is visually consistent to what we expect. It might contain 2 or 3 or more hardware pixels depending on the pixel density of the display we are using.

Where you tend to need to care about this is when you use images in your designs. The rest of the time the hardware is taking care of this mapping of hardware pixels to reference pixels. When you use images you might decide to create multiple versions of icons - for retina and non retina displays. Or use SVG instead, as this scalable format makes more sense with displays that double the number of pixels used to display an image.

## Pixels in CSS layout

When you use a pixel measurement you fix the size of the element on screen. Below we have created a container in which we might place a site design, giving it a width of 940 pixels. If the user stretches their screen wide they will get a lot of empty space to the right of the container, if the screen is smaller than 940 pixels then they will get a scrollbar.

    <div class="wrapper">
        <p>This div is set to 940 pixels width.</p>
    </div>
    .wrapper {
      width: 940px;
    }

An absolute unit therefore isn’t ideal if we are trying to create a fluid grid for a responsive design.

We might want to use pixels however if it makes sense for an element to be a particular size in a component we are building. 

For example you might have a fixed size image such as a logo and want the text beneath it to line up neatly below the image.
In my first example we demonstrated the problem of a fixed size container creating a scrollbar. However it can be useful to declare a size past which a container will not grow. 

In this example we have given my container a width of 90%, a length unit relative to the container which happens to be the viewport. So we don’t get a scrollbar. To stop the container growing too wide, making lines hard to read, we set a max-width in pixels. 

    <div class="wrapper">
        <p>This div is set to 90% of the viewport to a maximum of 940 pixels width.</p>
    </div>
    .wrapper {
      width: 90%;
      max-width: 940px;
    }
## When to use absolute length units?

As we have seen you should avoid using absolute units when your aim is to create a flexible and responsive site. However they can be useful in components when you know you do not want the area to stretch. They can also be helpful in defining max and min widths to stop areas becoming too narrow or too wide.

# Relative Units
## What is a relative unit?

A relative unit gets sizing from something else. In the specification the relative length units are defined as `em`, `ex`, `ch` and `rem`. These are font-relative lengths. The specification also defines a `%` value, which is always relative to another value. Using relative values means that things can scale up and down according to some other value. 

## Percentage units

A container directly inside the viewport with a width of 90% will always be 90% of the available width - whether we are on a phone or high resolution display.
If we have another container inside that first container with a width of 50%, it takes 50% of the width of the parent element and not the viewport.

    <div class="wrapper">
      <p>This div takes up 90% of the viewport width to a maximun of 940px.</p>
      <div class="inner">
      <p>The nested div is set to 50%. This makes it 50% of its direct parent.</p>
      </div>
    </div>
    .wrapper {
      width: 90%;
      max-width: 940px;
    }
    
    .wrapper .inner {
      width: 50%;
    }

Percentage units are a key component in the flexible grids needed for responsive design. 

## The font relative units `em`, `ex`, `ch` and `rem`

The first of these units are most of interest when it comes to the typography in your designs. The `rem` and `em` units however, while referring to font sizes, can be very useful in creating flexible, scalable designs.


    ex

The `ex` unit refers to the `x-height` of the font. Typically the size of the letter x in that font.


    ch

The `ch` unit refers to the width of the ‘0’ (zero) character in the font for that element.


    em

Using ems as a length unit in layout, and in particular in padding and margins can help to maintain a vertical rhythm. If a user resizes their text or you decide to make font sizes larger or smaller in your stylesheet, the em length unit will scale proportionately. In this example we are using ems for the padding on the box. The padding remains in proportion as we resize the font.

    <div class="box1">
      This box has padding set to 1em, and has a font-size of 20px. 
    </div>
    <div class="box2">
      This box also has padding set to 1em, and has a font-size of 40px.
    </div>
    
    .box1 {
      width: 300px;
      font-size: 20px;
      padding: 1em;
      border: 4px solid #ccc;
      margin-bottom: 20px;
    }
    
    .box2 {
      width: 300px;
      font-size: 40px;
      padding: 1em;
      border: 4px solid #ccc;
    }

Using em for the width of elements can ensure that a box containing some text increases in width as the font size increases. If we change the widths on the boxes in the example above to ems the boxes now increase in width as their font size increases.

    .box1, .box2 {
      width: 20em;
    }

The em size is relative to the font size on the element in question. This can make ems a little tricky to use. If elements are nested or appear in different contexts in your document you can find that text or elements sized with ems can appear much smaller or larger than you imagined. In the example below both nested boxes have the same class, setting a width of 10em. However that 10em is much wider in the second box because the parent has a larger font-size.

    <div class="box1">
      This box has padding set to 1em, and has a font-size of 20px. 
      <div class="inner">
        <p>This box is nested inside box 1, with a width of 10em.
      </div>
    </div>
    
    <div class="box2">
      This box also has padding set to 1em, and has a font-size of 40px. 
       <div class="inner">
        <p>This box is nested inside box 2, with a width of 10em.
      </div>
    </div>
    
    .box1 {
      width: 600px;
      font-size: 20px;
      padding: 1em;
      border: 4px solid #ccc;
      margin-bottom: 20px;
    }
    
    .box2 {
      width: 600px;
      font-size: 40px;
      padding: 1em;
      border: 4px solid #ccc;
    }
    
    .inner {
      width: 10em;
    }


    rem

The `rem` (root em) unit is the font-size of the root element, which is usually the `html` element. As with em, you can use this value as a length unit and it will always remain relative to the root element. You don’t get the nesting issue as we saw with em. This makes it easier for you to set sizes relative to a font size declared on the root element, no matter what context the element is in.

If we change the previous example so that `.inner` has a width of 20rem the width will be the same for that element no matter what the font-size of the parent is. To change that size we adjust the font size of the html element.

    .inner {
      font-size: 20rem;
    }

Browser support for the `rem` unit is [good](http://caniuse.com/#feat=rem) unless you need to support IE8. What you can do however is declare a font-size in pixels and then immediately afterwards in rems. IE8 will see the pixel value and use that, ignoring the rem value it doesn’t understand. The CSS cascade then takes effect for other browsers and they use the last value declared which is the rem value.

# Viewport Percentage Units
    vh: 1/100th of the height of the viewport

This unit makes it easy for us to make an element as tall as the viewport. For example a full screen image.

    <div class="splash">
    
    </div>
    
    <div class="content">
      <p>This content should be below the 'fold'.</p>
    </div>
    
    .splash {
      background-image: url(https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/2/2a/Silent_Hill_film_poster.jpg);
      background-size: cover;
      height: 100vh;
      width: 100%;
    }



    vw: 1/100th of the width of the viewport

You can use the `vw` unit for simple, flexible grids. The example below demonstrates two columns, one of 30vw and one of 60vw floated left and right.

    <div class="col1">
      This column takes up 30vw. 
    </div>
    
    <div class="col2">
      This column takes up 60vw.
    </div>
    .col1 {
      box-sizing: border-box;
      padding: 1em;
      width: 30vw;
      float:left;
      border: 4px solid #ccc;
    }
    
    .col2 {
      box-sizing: border-box;
      padding: 1em;
      width: 60vw;
      float: right;
      border: 4px solid #ccc;
    }

This isn’t a bulletproof method for creating a flexible grid, and is best reserved for creating ‘hero’ areas of your design where images and typography need to scale according to the viewport. 

> We can also use units `vmin` and `vmax`:

    vmin: equal to the smaller of vh or vw

A value of `10vmin` would be equal to `10vh` if the viewport was shorter than it is wide, and `10vw` if the viewport is taller than it is wide.

    vmax: equal to the larger of vh or vw

A value of `10vmax` would be equal to `10vh` if the viewport was taller than it is wide, and `10vw` if it is shorter than it is wide.
Some additional resources can be found at:

- [Viewport vs Percentage Units](https://bitsofco.de/viewport-vs-percentage-units/)

## Browser compatibility

These newer units were defined in level 3 of the CSS Values and Units Module, therefore are unsupported by some older browsers. In IE9 and up you can use `vh` and `vw`, IE9 uses `vm` instead of `vmin` and at the time of writing no IE or Edge browser supports `vmax`.

