# 05. Borders

---

<details>
    <summary>🎬 Video: Borders</summary><div class='video-container'>
        <iframe src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/MLarJ7GNE3o?rel=0" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen rel='0'></iframe></div>
</details>

---

The border goes around your element, you can wrap a border around each side or just some of the sides. For a seemingly simple thing there are a large number of border related properties.
**The border-* properties.**
Borders have been around since CSS 1, the up to date specification for border is in the CSS Backgrounds and Borders Module Level 3.
I’m going to begin with the shorthand and work up from there with border. If you wanted to add a 2 pixel, black border on all sides of your element you could use:

    .box {
      border: 2px solid #000;
    }

The `border` shorthand applies the same border to all sides of the element. To add that border to just one side, the top we can use a different shorthand:

    .box {
      border-top: 2px solid #000;
    }

For the other sides you can use:

    border-right
    border-bottom
    border-left

These are shorthands for three different properties. If we take `border-top` as an example, this is shorthand for:

    border-top-width
    border-top-style
    border-top-color

The `border-top-width` property takes any positive length unit, you can also use a keyword value of thin, medium or thick. You can’t have a negative sized border.
The `border-top-style` property takes one of a number of different style keywords. 

    none
    hidden
    dotted
    dashed
    solid
    double
    groove
    ridge
    inset
    outset
    inherit

It is fairly unusual for me to use anything other than `none`, `solid`, `dotted` or `dashed` however you can take a look at the other values if they achieve an effect you need. Note that the specification doesn’t precisely define things like the spacing between dots in `dotted` so you should check in different browsers to make sure it renders as you expect.
Finally, `border-top-color` takes a colour value. This can be any valid CSS colour value - hex, RGB, RGBa, named colours, HSL or HSLa.
**Other border properties**
In order to add rounded corners to a border you can use the `border-radius` property. Once again this is a shorthand for four properties, one for each corner:

    border-top-left-radius
    border-top-right-radius
    border-bottom-right-radius
    border-bottom-left-radius

The values for the border-radius properties are length or percentages, creating a circular border (if using one value) or an elliptical border (if using two values).
To round all four corners 10 pixels:

    .box {
      border: 2px solid #333;
      border-radius: 10px;
    }

To round just the top corners 10 pixels:

    .box {
      border-top-left-radius: 10px;
      border-top-right-radius: 10px;
    }

To create elliptical borders on all four corners:

    .box {
      border-radius: 60px / 30px;
    }


