# 06. Margins

---

<details>
    <summary>🎬 Video: Margins</summary><div class='video-container'>
        <iframe src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/HQMokv18exs?rel=0" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen rel='0'></iframe></div>
</details>

---

The `margin` properties in CSS add a margin around the element. The margin acts in the same way whichever box model you are using, it is added to the outside of the element making space between it and other elements.
The `margin` property is a shorthand that works in exactly the same way as the `padding` shorthand. A shorthand for `margin-top`, `margin-right`, `margin-bottom`, and `margin-left`. It accepts between 1 and 4 values so you can set all margins at once or some margins to a different size than others. Unlike padding and border however, the margin properties can accept negative values. This is something that can be quite useful as we will see later in this course.
In addition to length units you can use the value `auto`. This can be used to centre an element inside a container. For example, given the following markup:

    <div class="wrapper">
      <div class="box"></div>
    </div>

We can centre the div with a class of `box` with auto margins.

    .box {
      margin: 0 auto;
    }

**Understanding ‘margin collapsing’**
When you add margins to two elements you won’t always get the sum of the margins of both elements added together spacing them apart, this is because margins “collapse” under certain circumstances. They combine to become one margin. Knowing when and why this happens can be very useful.
If your item is floated or absolutely positioned then the margin you set on it will not collapse. Horizontal margins also never collapse, so when does this happen?
**Margin collapsing happens for one of three reasons. If you have two adjacent elements, one of which has a bottom margin and the other has a top margin, these margins will collapse unless the second element is cleared past a float.**
In the HTML below we have two div elements both with a class of box.

    <div class="box">Example 1</div>
    <div class="box">Example 2</div>

The CSS on `.box` gives a top and bottom margin of 20 pixels.

    .box {
      border: 2px solid black;
      margin: 20px 0 20px 0;
    }

The two boxes will only be separated by 20 pixels, as the boxes touch the margins are collapsed. They combine to become one margin.
**If an element is empty, so there is nothing separating the top and bottom margin.** Those margins will also collapse. In the below example the div with a class of empty has a top margin of 10 pixels and a bottom margin of 10 pixels, however the space left by the element would only be 10 pixels as the two margins collapse.

    <div class="empty"></div>
    .empty {
      margin: 10px 0 10px 0;
    }

If we then add some content into `empty` we get a margin of 10 pixels either side as the margins now do not touch.

    <div class="empty">test</div>

**If an element is nested inside another element and nothing separates the margin-top of the child element from the margin-top of the parent (and the same for the bottom margins) those margins collapse.** This is probably the most puzzling behaviour as the margin essentially ends up outside the parent. If you add anything - for example one pixel of padding the collapsing is prevented.
Given this markup:

    <div class="outer">
      <div class="nested">Nested box</div>
    </div>

This CSS - 10 pixels of margin applied to the top of the outer div.

    .outer {
      height: 200px;
      width: 200px;
      background-color: #999;
      color: #000;
      margin-top: 10px;
    }
    
    .nested {
      width: 120px;
    }

Will look the same as if we apply that 10 pixels to the inner div, or even to both.

    .nested {
      width: 120px;
      margin-top: 10px;
    }

However added just 1 pixel of padding to `.nested` means that the margins no longer touch and we get a margin outside of the outer box, and the margin on the inner box is contained.

## Browser default styling and “Reset” stylesheets

When you add some HTML to page and view it in the browser you can see that it is not completely unstyled. In addition to sizing being applied - such as making headings large and bold - margins and padding are applied to elements. This ensures that paragraphs are spaced out and the document is readable. Some of the CSS you will write is essentially to change or even remove this default styling.
At one point a reset stylesheet that essentially removed all the margins and padding was popular, however the result of doing this was that people would forget to re-add styles and then wonder why their paragraphs were no longer spaced. A more modern approach is to use a stylesheet that “normalizes” the default styles. A popular one being [Normalize.css](https://necolas.github.io/normalize.css/), this ensures that the default styling is the same cross-browser and gives you a good starting point to work from.

