# 08. Stacking content

---

<details>
    <summary>🎬 Video: Stacking content</summary><div class='video-container'>
        <iframe src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/iG2MDDi0jNc?rel=0" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen rel='0'></iframe></div>
</details>

---

In the previous block we looked at positioning elements and taking them out of document flow. This leads to a layering of items on the page as the elements sit on top of other things.

We can control this stacking of positioned elements using the `z-index` property. This property controls how our items stack up.

## If we don’t use z-index, how do things stack?

The CSS specification contains very detailed instructions for the painting order of CSS elements. In practice you probably won’t need to understand this in depth. Instead you can remember some simple rules.

If you haven’t specified a `z-index` and position items they will stack up in the order they are in the source. **Items that come later in the source order will display on top of items that come earlier** - assuming that all of the items are positioned.

In this example we have three paragraphs appearing in normal document flow.

    <p class="one">...</p>
    <p class="two">...</p>
    <p class="three">...</p>

I position each absolutely and you can see that they stack in the order they appeared in the document.

    p {
      width: 200px;
      border: 2px solid black;
      padding: 1em;
    }
    .one {
      background-color: #490A3D;
      color: #fff;
      position: absolute;
      top: 10px;
    }
    
    .two {
      background-color: #E97F02;
      position: absolute;
      top: 20px;
      left: 10px;
    }
    
    .three {
      background-color: #8A9B0F;
      position: absolute;
      top: 30px;
      left: 20px;
    }

If you have a mixture of positioned and unpositioned elements then the elements that have been positioned will sit on top of the others. To try this out remove all of the positioning information from paragraphs one and three. You will find that two now sits on top.

If you have floated elements these are painted after the unpositioned elements but before any positioned elements. For example, if you float two and give it a width of 200 pixels, the content of three will wrap.

    .two {
      background-color: #E97F02;
      float: left;
      width: 200px;
    }

So the **natural order of stacking is unpositioned → floated → positioned**.

# Controlling the stack

To force something to display on top of other things without moving where it is in the source we use **z-index**. We give the things we want to display on the top of the stack a higher z-index value.

By using z-index we can make sure that items which need to appear on top of other elements do so, even if they come earlier in the source and would naturally display behind later elements.

z-index by default is equal to 0. We can use positive and negative whole numbers to change the default order. 

If you do have a mixture of positioned and unpositioned items and find that you need to add a z-index to an unpositioned element then setting it to `position: relative` will enable you to add a z-index property without taking that element out of document flow.

In practice however you will find that using z-index isn’t something you need to do constantly.


## Other things that create a stacking context

Positioning an element with a value of `absolute`, `relative`or `fixed`, as we have seen, creates a *stacking context*. This dictates how it and all of its child elements behave in the stacking order. There are other things that cause elements to have a stacking context. This can cause the simple rules we have discussed above to seem to behave erratically.

**Flex items and parent**
Items in a Flex layout form a stacking context, as does the parent - the item set to `display: flex` or `display: inline-flex`.

**Grid items and parent**
Items in a Grid layout also create a stacking context as does the parent element.

**Opacity**
If you use the opacity property, with a value of less than 1 this will form a stacking context.

**Other properties**
You will also form a stacking content by:

- Giving an element a transform value (that is not none)
- Giving an element a `mix-blend-mode` values other than `normal`
- Elements with something other than `filter: none`
- Elements with `isolation` set to `isolate`
- 

For more examples and explanations of stacking elements see this page on the [Mozilla Developer Network](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_Positioning/Understanding_z_index/The_stacking_context). For a detailed explanation and demo of how opacity can change stacking order take a look at [this post by Philip Walton](http://philipwalton.com/articles/what-no-one-told-you-about-z-index/).

