# 10. Display property

---

<details>
    <summary>🎬 Video: display property</summary><div class='video-container'>
        <iframe src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/74HOVtCR21Y?rel=0" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen rel='0'></iframe></div>
</details>

---


The full list of all possible values for the `display` property could be found here: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/display


# Basic values of display
    display: none
    display: block
    display: inline
    display: list-item

Every value of display changes how elements display on screen. The most basic values of display allow us to change whether an element displays at all, is an inline or a block element.

As an example browsers display paragraphs as block level elements, and spans as inline. The two paragraphs below will display with a line break between them if we have not used any CSS to remove margins from the element.

    <p>Felis taciti mus penatibus etiam leo sodales condimentum et purus in urna suspendisse rutrum dictum metus semper dis. Parturient a a a blandit facilisi id eu porta ultricies vestibulum vestibulum mi etiam a.</p>
    <p>Facilisis id litora eu mi a at lobortis odio vestibulum. <span>This is a span.</span> Adipiscing conubia parturient scelerisque tempor nec cras adipiscing nam interdum.</p>

We can make the first paragraph to be not displayed at all by using `display: none`:


    p:first-child {
      display: none;
    }

Using `display: none` causes the paragraph to disappear, any space it took up is also removed as if the element was not there at all.

We can make the `span` a block level element, so that it will break onto a new line just like a paragraph by setting it to `display:block`.

We can make paragraphs display like inline elements by setting them to `display: inline`:

    p {
      display: inline;
    }

It’s important to know that you can choose to use the **correct semantic** HTML element for whatever you are trying to mark up, and then use the display property to make it display visually as you need. Do this instead of choosing an alternate, less ideal element just because it has certain display properties by default.


## Properties of block and inline elements

Whether an item is block or inline changes how you can style it. 

**Block level** **elements** will **expand** **widthways** to fill their parent, unless you set a width on the element. It will **expand** in **height** to contain any child elements - unless those children are positioned or floated as we’ve already seen.

Block level elements can have **margins** and **padding** added to all side of the box, and as we have already seen they will drop below other elements in the display unless they have been floated.

Another property of block level elements is that they **ignore** the `vertical-align` property, something which often confuses new developers.

**Inline elements** behave like our span above. They remain inline of anything else around them and don’t drop onto a new line or take up full width. They **ignore height** and **width** and also top and bottom **margins**. You can however add padding. Inline elements do respect the vertical-align property.

## display: list-item

The final value we will cover here is `list-item` which deals with the slightly unusual display of list items. It generates a block level box for the entire item (including the bullet or number) and then an inline box for the content of the item. We almost never set anything to `display: list-item` however it is useful to know you get that behaviour in a browser by creating a list.


# And now we can improve our floated navigation

In our floated navigation example we have a link that looks like a large button but the actual hit area is just the text. This is because the link is an inline element.

That’s our code:

    .main-nav li {
      padding: 10px;
      float: left;
      width: 8em;
      text-align: center;
      border-right: 1px solid #fff;
      background-color: black;
    }
    
    .main-nav a:link, .main-nav a:visited {
      text-decoration: none;
      color: #fff;
    }

First, take the padding off the `li` and add it to the `a` element. As inline elements don’t respect top and bottom padding this won’t change the display. However if we also add `display: block` to the link this turns it into a block level element. It then fills the parent li and also adds the padding. Our target area is now much larger.

    .main-nav li {
      float: left;
      width: 8em;
      text-align: center;
      border-right: 1px solid #fff;
      background-color: black;
    }
    
    .main-nav a:link, .main-nav a:visited {
      padding: 10px;
      display: block;
      text-decoration: none;
      color: #fff;
    }

As a finishing touch we could now add a hover effect as we can change the background colour of our link on hover.

    .main-nav a:hover {
      background-color: orange;
    }

