# 14. align-items

---

<details>
    <summary>🎬 Video: align-items</summary><div class='video-container'>
        <iframe src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/jIKdM-LMBLE?rel=0" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen rel='0'></iframe></div>
</details>

---

    <div class="wrapper">
      <div class="inner">
        <div class="card">
          <h2>Card 1</h2>
          <p>Lorem ipsum dolor amet selfies bicycle rights tacos af hexagon helvetica locavore kogi butcher etsy. Chartreuse flannel austin stumptown heirloom, PBR&B forage godard DIY.</p>
        </div>
        <div class="card">
          <h2>Card 2</h2>
          <p>Lorem ipsum dolor amet selfies bicycle rights tacos af hexagon helvetica locavore kogi butcher etsy. Chartreuse flannel austin stumptown heirloom, PBR&B forage godard DIY.</p>
        </div>
        <div class="card">
          <h2>Card 3</h2>
          <p>Lorem ipsum dolor amet selfies bicycle rights tacos af hexagon helvetica locavore kogi butcher etsy. Chartreuse flannel austin stumptown heirloom, PBR&B forage godard DIY.</p>
        </div>
      </div>
    
    </div>


    
    .wrapper {
      width: 90%;
      margin: 0 auto;
    }
    
    .inner {
      display: flex;
      height: 80vh;
      border: 5px solid #000;
    }
    
    .card {
      border: 2px solid orange;
      border-radius:5px;
      background-color: black;
      color: #fff;
      margin: 0 10px 0 10px;
    }
    
    .card h2 {
      background-color: purple;
      margin: 0;
      padding: 10px;
    }
    
    .card p {
      padding: 10px;
    }
    
    
    html {
      box-sizing: border-box;
    }
    *, *:before, *:after {
      box-sizing: inherit;
    }

The default value of `align-items` is `stretch`. If you do not add an `align-items` value to your flex container or an `align-self` value to an individual item, and have your items in a row, they will stretch to the height of the tallest. 

This is because the tallest is normally defining the height of the flex container. In this example we have our flex container to be `90vh` you can see how the items extend to meet it.

With our items in a row we use `align-items` to align them. We could use:

    flex-start: align the items at the start of the flex container
    flex-end: align the items at the end of the flex container
    center: centre the items
    baseline: align the items so their baselines match
    stretch: stretch the items all to the same height.

To vertically centre our items we set `align-items` to `center`.

    .inner {
      display: flex;
      height: 90vh;
      border: 5px solid #ccc;
      align-items: center;
    }


In these examples we are using `align-items` on the flex container, this changes the alignment of all the items in the container. To change just one item, use `align-self` with one of the values above on the flex item:

    .card:nth-child(2) {
      align-self: flex-start;
    }

This will align second container differently form the rest of them.

You can also use `auto` as a value for `align-self` this will set the value to the `align-items` value on the parent.