# Cross-browser testing

While you are going to build your website in your browser of choice we should remember there are a lot of people using all the possible browsers/versions/devices. Some of them are hopelessly outdated which could happen by million of reasons like being installed by their company or users don't know they can update them.

It worth testing in a variety of browsers to make sure that, even if you have chosen to use more modern CSS than a browser supports, your content is accessible. Whether you are on a Mac, Windows or Linux you can install Chrome or Opera (which both use the Blink rendering engine) and Firefox. If you are on Windows then you will be able to install the Edge browser. Mac users who want to test IE and Edge, and Windows users who want to test in older versions of IE need to come up with a way to do this.

So to make sure you can test across many different browsers you can get a bunch of old laptops with all the possible OS installed or use available testing tools:

## Virtual Machines

Virtual Machines are complete operating systems running on your computer. You need a tool that lets you run a Virtual Machine such as:

* VMWare Fusion or Workstation
* Parallels
* VirtualBox

VirtualBox is free and works well enough for most people, so you may want to give it a try first before paying for another solution.

You can then install an Operating System or download an “image” to run in your Virtual Machine.
Commonly developers want to install and test on older versions of Internet Explorer, and Microsoft have made it really easy for us to do so. On the modern.ie website you can download a Virtual Machine for a wide variety of combinations of Windows version and browser.

Once installed you can test using the actual browser rather than any kind of emulation. If you are doing a lot of very modern CSS and need to do extensive testing then I would suggest getting set up with Virtual Machines.

## BrowserStack and similar sites

BrowserStack puts a huge number of browser and operating systems at your fingertips.

On the modern.ie site you can also access remote testing. This is where you connect to a remote machine that is running the browser you want to test. Depending on your network connection this can be somewhat slow and laggy as you test across the network, however it can be helpful.

You can get a BrowserStack trial to try it out and it is a great way to get access to a large selection of browsers.


## Mobile testing

If you take a look at BrowserStack you will see that there are mobile devices you can test in. This gives you a way of checking that your layouts work on mobile.

However mobile testing is not just about how things look, when people are interacting by touch there are things that only become obvious when you try on a real device.

Most of us are going to have at least one mobile device to test on - our own! So that can give you a good idea. Great idea is to get a cheap and under-powered device for testing to not assume that everybody will have the same most likely powerful device you do.

If you can collect older phones and tablets from friends and family they can be useful, as can a little bit of Guerrilla testing at the Apple Store! 

General steps for the cross-browser compatibility:

* Start with a valid, sensibly structured document.
* Check your analytics or comparable ones and detail the browsers you think need to get the full experience.
* Work mobile first and simplest case first, layering on the experience for wider viewports and more capable devices and browsers.
* If you need to deal with something unsupported in a target browser consider whether you can use an alternate method for that browser, or fork your code by using feature detection.
* Don’t forget to add any relevant vendor prefixes.
* Test!

Remember, it's hard to impossible to have **exactly** the same rendering across **all** of the devices/browsers, and that's alright, it's web, not printed media! 
