# Debugging and validating

## Make sure you have valid HTML and CSS

Many CSS bugs turn out not to be a CSS issue at all, but are due to the browser making decisions as it tried to determine what you meant by something it doesn’t recognize.

Browsers are very tolerant of our bad markup and CSS, and will very often guess correctly when we do something that doesn’t match the specification. However, they may guess incorrectly or you may find yourself in a situation where one browser guesses one thing, and another something else.

The first step therefore is to validate the markup and CSS for the page on which the problem is happening. You can do this over at the W3C website:

[HTML Validator](https://validator.w3.org/)
[CSS Validator](https://jigsaw.w3.org/css-validator/)

Unless you are completely unable to modify the source document, your first step should always be to get to valid HTML and CSS. This removes the possibility of a simple code error causing the problem.

## Reduced Test Cases

If you have something spooky going on on your page you need to try to make a reduced test case meaning cut out everything else (like external libraries and JS code which could mes up your layout) and strip the page one by one of all elements but the one which is in question. 

You can also use tools like CodePen to copy the snippet in question and test it there. 

## Browser built-in dev tools

A good way to explore your markup is to use the dev tools coming with your browser. In Chrome we have Elements panel which represents how your browser renders your markup. So it could be different from what you see in the View Source panel. The Elements panel is the result of browsers interpretation of your source code. 