# Multiple column layout

## HTML:

	<article class="content">
		<h1>Here comes Hipster Ipsum</h1>
		<p>Lorem ipsum dolor amet pitchfork four loko ramps narwhal, fashion axe bushwick knausgaard brunch gochujang photo booth slow-carb. Irony locavore PBR&B, meggings single-origin coffee kale chips salvia microdosing flexitarian hella blue bottle. Kogi cold-pressed chia, slow-carb yr pickled iceland. Cloud bread kitsch 90's edison bulb venmo ethical mixtape tilde bespoke hoodie tbh yr narwhal. Vice pour-over XOXO, hammock trust fund iceland pinterest occupy messenger bag man braid. Tumeric activated charcoal vinyl lyft cred tumblr organic wolf farm-to-table PBR&B. IPhone pork belly before they sold out food truck knausgaard microdosing fam bushwick.</p>

		<p>Cliche hella letterpress pok pok pitchfork. Pok pok small batch flannel franzen snackwave authentic, health goth artisan cardigan kickstarter yr bicycle rights activated charcoal. Put a bird on it trust fund cronut, brunch tumeric taiyaki umami gentrify. Kogi jean shorts pickled, green juice bicycle rights meditation readymade swag plaid vinyl fashion axe thundercats. Mumblecore asymmetrical chia, fixie hella tumeric intelligentsia. Chillwave offal next level health goth trust fund, craft beer godard poke DIY sriracha.</p>

		<p>Coloring book blog everyday carry, skateboard chia cardigan health goth tumblr. Stumptown next level twee, fashion axe polaroid normcore meggings seitan tbh YOLO bicycle rights deep v pork belly. Authentic cronut flannel 8-bit chartreuse cold-pressed hell of pabst +1 listicle scenester meditation quinoa. Etsy shaman enamel pin woke, blue bottle tumblr flannel four loko fam authentic trust fund subway tile thundercats art party.</p>

		<p>Church-key chambray food truck, raclette ennui typewriter artisan hella small batch sustainable. Dreamcatcher post-ironic edison bulb street art hashtag pickled shaman ennui poutine occupy squid scenester vape put a bird on it banh mi. Woke authentic ethical irony la croix prism you probably haven't heard of them taiyaki, iceland raw denim austin seitan slow-carb migas. Pinterest succulents listicle, neutra portland meggings gastropub kombucha fam tattooed cardigan unicorn tote bag street art food truck. Lo-fi farm-to-table live-edge tofu before they sold out beard. Asymmetrical lomo organic kickstarter biodiesel.</p>

		<p>Jean shorts small batch kitsch, master cleanse hoodie sartorial wayfarers selfies fam actually gastropub. Woke sustainable 3 wolf moon, small batch pok pok iceland tumblr flannel cold-pressed drinking vinegar venmo. Cray dreamcatcher mustache tote bag. DIY lomo YOLO bitters. Kale chips kinfolk jianbing, biodiesel locavore copper mug cloud bread shaman plaid.</p>

		<p>Chartreuse kickstarter palo santo stumptown, authentic mlkshk heirloom cloud bread flexitarian XOXO brooklyn mumblecore aesthetic af iPhone. Celiac jean shorts put a bird on it, cronut iceland enamel pin YOLO pug affogato health goth artisan. Enamel pin knausgaard hot chicken waistcoat prism food truck tousled shaman shabby chic mustache XOXO vape art party. Viral stumptown vaporware shaman. Poutine cray XOXO trust fund asymmetrical air plant pabst. Chia hoodie woke knausgaard ramps mlkshk. Selvage distillery williamsburg normcore, 90's literally pinterest chicharrones hella VHS occupy green juice stumptown.</p>

		<p>Shoreditch roof party hexagon actually iceland single-origin coffee. Truffaut glossier church-key semiotics viral kickstarter gentrify, keytar messenger bag occupy flannel. Ethical trust fund salvia butcher cred hot chicken gastropub vexillologist coloring book chambray. Gentrify cornhole messenger bag, green juice pabst organic everyday carry. Farm-to-table sriracha lumbersexual yuccie authentic pickled, you probably haven't heard of them 3 wolf moon. Dreamcatcher bushwick roof party small batch taxidermy blog. DIY hashtag try-hard cold-pressed.</p>

		<p>Actually truffaut occupy hoodie. Copper mug literally woke, asymmetrical gastropub ethical health goth tofu listicle occupy four loko deep v echo park. Kale chips hammock quinoa umami waistcoat pug ennui biodiesel vape adaptogen cloud bread offal. Polaroid vinyl raclette crucifix migas before they sold out post-ironic hexagon fashion axe prism. La croix meh banh mi four dollar toast four loko post-ironic slow-carb tote bag man braid.</p>

		<p>Tousled activated charcoal intelligentsia chambray swag ethical meditation poke taiyaki chartreuse kitsch next level four dollar toast fingerstache. Activated charcoal jianbing hashtag everyday carry before they sold out, synth cold-pressed gastropub tumblr. Adaptogen polaroid thundercats, kinfolk cardigan readymade pour-over raclette franzen before they sold out cray. Unicorn tousled woke lo-fi shabby chic.</p>

		<p>Artisan intelligentsia fingerstache bitters hashtag. Everyday carry live-edge bespoke tilde wayfarers, waistcoat vexillologist single-origin coffee cold-pressed vegan yr XOXO meh. Readymade raw denim forage iceland trust fund etsy skateboard. Tilde heirloom unicorn single-origin coffee, vexillologist viral migas church-key health goth. Normcore kickstarter tilde, ennui everyday carry succulents aesthetic swag. Twee selvage next level tacos. Pop-up pug leggings, 90's brooklyn tumblr adaptogen yr pabst semiotics pok pok.</p>
		<p>Oh. You need a little dummy text for your mockup? How quaint.</p>

		<p>I bet you’re still using Bootstrap too…</p>
	</article>

Multiple-columns layout has a good browsers support and can be handy to automatically create a layout often seen in newspapers and magazine, where text wraps to the new lines with a given number of columns. 

Let's say we want our article to automatically distribute content into 3 even columns. To have that we will need to add following CSS:

	.content {
		column-count: 3;
	}

Amazing!

Instead of number of columns we can give a width for one column and CSS will create as many of them as possible given the screen size:

	.content {
	  column-width: 200px;
	}

You can specify both `column-width` and `column-count`. In this case `column-count` serves to indicate the **maximum** number of columns that are allowed. So you will get fewer columns than this value if the viewport becomes narrower than can support that number of columns around the optimal width however if the viewport becomes very wide you will never get more columns than the `column-count` value.

	.content {
	  column-width: 200px;
	  column-count: 3;
	}


# Gutters between columns

When you apply a multiple column layout the browser adds some spacing between the columns so they don’t bump up right against each other. This gap is not controlled by padding or margins but by the `column-gap` property.

By default browsers use `1em` as the `column-gap`. If you wanted to completely remove the gap for some reason you would set `column-gap` to 0.

	.content {
	  column-width: 300px;
	  column-gap: 0;
	}

You can use any length units for this gap. The browser will then take the gaps into account when working out how much space there is for columns. The `column-gap` only happens between two adjacent columns - you don’t get a gap after the last column or before the first.

The `column-gap` is the only way to control spacing between columns. There is no way to set margins or padding on a column. Columns have other limitations in the present specification:

* all columns are the same width. You can’t set different sizes on columns.
* you can’t change the background-color of a column.

This specification does something very simple. It arranges your content into columns. Don’t expect it to give you any finer control than that!

# Column Rules

We can’t use `border` on a column but we have a property that helps us to add a separator between our columns - the `column-rule` property. This property is a shorthand that works in a similar way to border. So we have:

	column-rule-width
	column-rule-style
	column-rule-color

As with `border` these can be expressed as a shorthand:

	column-rule: 2px solid black;

An interesting thing to note about `column-rules` is that they take up no space of their own. They essentially overlay the gap created by the `column-gap` property.

You can see what happens if you create a very wide `column-rule`. It will overlay the content of your columns. To make space between the column content and the rule you need to make the gap wider, giving space for the rule plus whatever space you want either side of that.

# Images and Spanning across columns

If images in columns are set to `max-width: 100%` - our simple method of making images responsive and flexible - then they will remain within the column and scale according to column width.

If you don’t set `max-width: 100%` then any image will essentially become cropped to fit the column. It won’t overflow.

# Spanning across columns

A common feature of magazine and newspaper layouts is to have elements that span across the columns. A headline, or perhaps an image. We can achieve this with multiple column layout. You can tell any child of the content that has been turned into columns to span `‘all’`.

	.content h1 {
	  column-span: all;
	}

The heading will now span across all of the columns. It does not need to be only things at the top of the content that span. Our image for example could be set to span right across the columns.

	.content img {
	  column-span: all;
	  display: block;
	}

If you look at the flow of text when we span something across the middle of it you will see that the content doesn’t “bridge the gap”. What happens is our content fills the column until it meets the spanned element and then starts the next column and so on until all columns are filled. We then get the spanned element, then the columns continue with the left-hand column and continue below the spanned element.

You might wonder if it would be possible to span just some columns, in order to create an insert into the content. Unfortunately you can’t, you can span none or span all. That’s your only option.

As you can see the paragraphs are divided into columns automatically by the browser based on the amount of content. If you want to manually specify the breaking points - let's say to prevent paragraphs from being split in the middle of them - you could use this: 

	p {
	  break-inside: avoid;
	}

## Usage example

One of the best usage examples of this method would be to organize a long list of checkboxes on the input form, so that instead of a list with 15 options we will have 3 columns with 5 options each. 