# Flex property

---

<details>
    <summary>🎬 Video: flex property</summary><div class='video-container'>
        <iframe src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/pJ8bcsKPlTc?rel=0" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen rel='0'></iframe></div>
</details>

---

## HTML:

	<div class="wrapper"><div class="inner">
	  <div class="card">
	    <h2>Card 1</h2>
	    <p>Content one.</p>
	  </div>
	  <div class="card">
	    <h2>Card 2</h2>
	    <p>Content two.
	    </p>
	  </div>
	  <div class="card">
	    <h2>Card 3</h2>
	    <p>Content three.</p>
	  </div>
	  </div>

	</div>

## CSS:


	.wrapper {
	  width: 90%;
	  margin: 0 auto;
	}

	.inner {
	  display: flex;
	}

	.card {
	  border: 2px solid black;
	  border-radius:5px;
	  background-color: purple;
	  color: #fff;
	  margin: 0 10px 0 10px;
	}


	.card h2 {
	  background-color: pink;
	  color: orange;
	  margin: 0;
	  padding: 10px;
	}

	.card p {
	  padding: 10px;
	}

	.card:nth-child(1) {

	}

	.card:nth-child(2) {

	}

	.card:nth-child(3) {

	}


	html {
	  box-sizing: border-box;
	}
	*, *:before, *:after {
	  box-sizing: inherit;
	}

## The flex-grow property
We’ve already seen how using flex-grow with a positive value will allow it to grow from the size given for flex-basis. However the important thing to understand about flex-grow is that is enables you to distribute space in proportion. If we have three flex items and all have flex-grow set to 1, any free space will be distributed equally between the items.

	.card {
	  flex: 1 1 200px;
	}

we have given each box a flex-basis of 200 pixels, so they are all starting from the same width. As flex-grow is 1, any free space after accounting for the 200 pixel basis for each item will be distributed to each item equally. However, if we change the flex-grow value to 2 on the first box.

	.card {
	  flex: 1 1 200px;
	}

	.card:first-child {
	  flex: 2 1 200px;
	}

The first box will be given 2 times the share of available space. Note that this doesn’t make the box twice the size of the other boxes, however after the 200 pixels is taken away from the available space in the container the rest of the space is distributed according to the flex factor we have set using flex-grow. In the case of our three boxes we have 1 box that has a flex-grow of 2, and two each with a flex-grow of 1. So the remaining space is divided into 4. One part is given to each of the boxes with a flex-grow of 1 and two parts to the box with a flex-grow of 2.

## The flex-shrink property

The flex-shrink property allows you to set how much the item will shrink relative to other items. In this way it works just like flex-grow. However the specification also says,

>“Note: The flex shrink factor is multiplied by the flex base size when distributing negative space. This distributes negative space in proportion to how much the item is able to shrink, so that e.g. a small item won’t shrink to zero before a larger item has been noticeably reduced.”

So it may not be the case that an item with a flex-shrink value of 2 will shrink two times the amount that an item with a flex-shrink value of 1 does, as the algorithm makes sure that an item does not shrink to zero where there is still space available.

## The flex-basis property

We have already seen how flex-basis represents the optimal width for our items. Playing around with flex-basis can give you a level of control over when elements wrap, when using flexbox with the flex-wrap property set to wrap. Therefore you can create layouts which respond to screen width without needing to also add Media Queries.

For example, if we set the flex container of our three boxes to flex-wrap: wrap and then add the flex property to the individual boxes with a flex basis of 300 pixels. Once the boxes become smaller than 300 pixels they will wrap. We don’t need to add Media Queries to cause this behavior. On a larger screen the boxes will all display in one line as there is enough space for them.

## A flex-basis of auto
What happens if we set the flex-basis to auto? If the item has a width (when we are working with a row) or height (when working with a column) then this size will be used if auto is specified. In our example if we set a width on any item, and then set flex-basis to auto the width will be used. If there is no explicit width (or height) on the item, then auto will act like an additional value of flex-basis - content. It takes the size from the content of the item.

Using auto is therefore a good plan if you just want the flex-basis to react to some other aspect of the flex item, either a size you have set on it or the content inside it.

## Default values for the flex property
The specification suggests that we use the flex property rather than the individual properties of flex-grow, flex-shrink and flex-basis.

>“Authors are encouraged to control flexibility using the flex shorthand rather than with its longhand properties directly, as the shorthand correctly resets any unspecified components to accommodate common uses.” - 7.2. Components of Flexibility

What are these defaults? There are four values that you can give the flex property, rather than specifying the individual components.

`flex: initial`: this is the initial value of flex items when you create a flex container and is the same as `flex: 0 1 auto`. This will size your items according to width and height (or the contents if no width or height is set), the item cannot grow but can shrink.

`flex: auto`: like setting `flex: 1 1 auto`;. The item is sized as above but can grow as well as shrink.

`flex: none`: this is the equivalent of setting `flex: 0 0 auto`, you will have fully inflexible items.

`flex: 1` or `flex: 2` and so on: this sets the flex-grow to the integer you specify, flex-shrink to 0 and flex-basis to 0. This means that the items will grow according to the factor you specify.

Take some time to play around with these examples and get an understanding of how this works. Once you have figured it out, much of the mystery of flexbox will become transparent to you!
